27/10/2013             
Disclosure -A Practitioner's View.

Chapter 1 - History
The Dunblane Massacre.
On the 13th March 1996, 43 year old Thomas Hamilton (b, 10th May 1952) walked into Dunblane Primary School with four handguns, and in a three minute period, killed sixteen children and one teacher, before taking his own life.
On the 29th May 1996, William Douglas Cullen, Baron Cullen of Whitekirk, KT, PC, FRSE, born 18th November 1935, one of the senior members of the Scottish Judiciary, held an Inquiry into the events at Dunblane Primary School.

Lord Cullen’s Recommendations on “vetting” included:-
 “There should be a system for the accreditation of a national body of clubs and groups voluntarily attended by children and young persons under 16years of age for their education or development, the main purpose of which would be to ensure that there are adequate checks on the suitability of the leaders and worker who have substantial unsupervised access to them.”
“Consideration should be given to the development of a Scottish Vocational Qualification in respect of work with children, including theorganisation of clubs and child development and protection.”
Having carefully analysed the difficulties of having any compulsory scheme for the vetting of either clubs or leaders, and of the difficulties of any voluntary accreditation scheme for leaders as individuals (opposed to clubs) Lord Cullen proposes that there should be a national accrediting body, to which voluntary, charitable and private groups could apply on a voluntary basis. Clubs and groups would pay for accreditation, thus enabling the national body to be self-financing. In this system the onus will be on parents to checkwhether a club is accredited before deciding if their children should attend.
Lord Cullen also suggests that before a local authority grants any lets for its premises, it should ensure that the group or club is accredited. It is envisaged that the national body should be involved in the on-going monitoring of groups to ensure that their performance matches their stated aims. In the case of a bad report, the group could have its accreditation removed.
Whilst the proposals should in principle be welcomed, reservations must be expressed as the proposed accreditation body is not integrated into the current local authority arrangements designed to protect children.
It is difficult to see how a national body will be able to carry out on-going monitoring without incurring significant costs.
The report does not say “leaders” in organisations seeking accreditation must have the proposed SVQ.

The Government’s Response
The Government accepted the need for co-operation of information at national level about persons regarded as potentially unsuitable for work with children and young people, and the need to ensure that all voluntary youth organisations should have arrangements to check on the suitability of leaders and workers. Access to criminal records checks is to be extended to all voluntary youth organisations (this follows proposals in a consultation document “On the Record in Scotland” published in June). The Government will consult immediately with all interested parties in Scotland on the proposals for the establishment of arrangements for a national information and accreditation system (there will be parallel consultation in England and Wales). This led to the creation of Disclosure Scotland and disclosure under part V of the Police Act 1997. The Government accepted Lord Cullen’s recommendations that consideration be given to the development of a Scottish Vocational Qualification in respect of work with children, including the organisation of clubs and child development and protection, and is inviting the Scottish Vocational Education Council urgently to bring forward proposals.

Soham - The murders of Holy and Jessica.
On the 4th August 2002, Holly Marie Wells (10), b,4th October 1991, and Jessica Aimee Chapman 10, b, 1st September 1991 were murdered by Ian Kevin Huntley, (39), b, 31st January 1974, the Caretaker at the girl's school, in the local school, Soham Village College. Huntley was convicted in the High Court and sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment, with a minimum of 40 years. His girlfriend, Maxine Ann Carr, Huntley's girlfriend, was the girl's Teaching Assistant at St Andrew's Primary School in Soham. Carr provided Huntley with a false alibi and was sentenced to 21 months imprisonment for Perverting the Course of Justice.

Huntley's Criminal Background.
In August 1995, when Huntley was 21 years old, a joint investigation was launched by police and social services in Grimsby, after a 15-year-old girl admitted that she had been having sex with Huntley. Police did not pursue the case against Huntley in accordance with the girl's wishes.
In March 1996, Huntley was charged in connection with a burglary at a Grimsby house which took place on 15 November 1995, when he and an accomplice allegedly stole electrical goods, jewellery and cash. The case reached court and was ordered to lie on file. Also in March 1996, Huntley was once again investigated over allegations of having sex with an underage girl, but again he was not charged.
A month later, Huntley was investigated once again over allegations of under age sex, but this allegation too did not result in a charge. The same outcome occurred the following month when he was investigated over allegations of having sex with a 13-year-old girl.
In April 1998, Huntley was arrested on suspicion of raping a woman. He admitted having sex with the woman but claimed it was consensual. The police decided not to charge Huntley.
A month later, Huntley was charged with rape and remanded in custody after an 18-year-old Grimsby woman claimed to have been raped by him on her way home from a nightclub in the town. The charge was dropped a week later after the Crown Prosecution Service examined CCTV images from the nightclub and determined that there was no chance of a conviction.
In July 1998, Huntley was investigated by the police on allegations that he indecently assaulted an 11-year-old girl in September 1997. However, he was never charged, though in April 2007 he confessed that he attacked the girl. He was investigated over allegations of rape on a 17-year-old girl in February 1999 but no charges were made against him.
The final allegation came in July 1999, when a woman was raped and Huntley – by now suspected by local police as a serial sex offender – was interviewed. He supplied a DNA sample and had an alibi provided by Maxine Carr to assert his innocence. The woman subsequently said that Huntley was not the rapist. This was the only case where the victim had not identified or named Huntley as the attacker.
An inquiry was announced on 18 December 2003, and Sir Michael Bichard was appointed as the chairman. The stated purpose was:
"Urgently to enquire into child protection procedures in Humberside Police and Cambridgeshire Constabulary in the light of the recent trial and conviction of Ian Huntley for the murder of Jessica Chapman and Holly Wells.
In particular to assess the effectiveness of the relevant intelligence-based record keeping, the vetting practices in those forces since 1995 and information sharing with other agencies, and to report to the Home Secretary on matters of local and national relevance and make recommendations as appropriate".
The inquiry opened on 13 January 2004. The findings of the Bichard Enquiry were published in June that year. The Humberside and Cambridgeshire police forces were heavily criticised for their failings in maintaining intelligence records on Huntley.
Recommendation 19 (Disclosure Checks - The development of this recommendation led to the foundation of the Independent Safeguarding Authority (ISA, now known as the Disclosure Barring Service (DBS)).
New arrangements should be introduced requiring those who wish to work with children, or vulnerable adults, to be registered. This register - perhaps supported by a card or licence - would confirm that there is no known reason why an individual should not work with these client groups.
(a) The new register would be administered by a central body, which would take the decision, subject to published criteria, to approve or refuse registration on the basis of all the information made available to them by police or other agencies.
(b) The responsibility for judging the relevance of Police intelligence in deciding a person's suitability would lie with the central body. The Police, as now, would be able to identify intelligence, which on no account, should be disclosed to the applicant.
(c) Employers should still decide, based on good selection procedures, whether or not the job requires the post-holder to be registered and should retain the ultimate decision as to whether or not to employ.
(d) The central body would have the discretion to ignore any conviction information that is judged not to be relevant to the position in question.
(e) Individuals should have the right to appeal against any refusal to place them on the register and that right should be exercised before any information is made available to a third party.
(f) The register should be continuously updated and available to prospective employers for checking on-line or by telephone.
(g) The register should be introduced in a phased way, over a period of years, to avoid the problems associated with the introduction of the Criminal Records Bureau.
(h) The DfES, in consultation with other government departments, should decide whether the registration scheme should be evidenced by a license or card.

Recommendation 20 (QAF)
HMIC should develop, with ACPO and the CRB, the standards to be observed by police forces in carrying out vetting
checks. These should cover the intelligence databases to be searched, the robustness of procedures, guidance, training, supervision and audit.
The DfES, the Department of Health and the Home Office The inquiry also recommended a registration scheme for people working with children and vulnerable adults such as the elderly.  It also suggested a national system should be set up for police forces to share intelligence information. The report said there should also be a clear code of practice on record-keeping by all Police forces.

Notes:-
26th August 2013 - Meeting at Glenrothes with Iain Gray and Rachel Watson, when it was decided that Sgt Scott Johnston would sign off all the `No Disclosures` for Glenrothes and Rachel would sign off all the `Disclosures`.
28th August 2013 - at Fettes to do a 50th anniversary Presentation for Douglas Wright on behalf of the PVG Practitioners Group. We were in the Reception when Rachel Watson came in announced that she had arranged for Stephen ................ to make changes to the QAF Database, and she also said she was going to make changes to the QAF Guidance to suit the new regime. I couldn't believe what I was hearing. Someone like Rachel Watson, with her reputation, prepared to destroy over 8 years work!
21st September 2013 - DCI Ross Bennet withdrew from the Delegated signatory role for Fife and Central Scotland, taking DI Stuart Allan and DS Craig Morris as well. This has left a gaping hole in the management structure, leaving no one of rank to sign off in either division.
As it was obvious that neither Iain Gray or Sheena Brennan had any idea a how to resolve the Delegated Signatory role, I put two suggestions to Sheena the night before the Strategic Group meeting, firstly, that I could do the `No Disclosure` signatory role in Glenrothes and Sgt Scott Johnston could fulfill the `Disclosure` signatory role for Glenrothes. The effect of this strategy was two fold; one, it would reduce the workload on Scott, and two, it would keep Rachel Watson well away from Glenrothes. Second, that as a `worst case scenario`, as long as we were able to establish a link between Glenrothes and Stirling, Caroline, could sign off Trina`s `No Disclosure` decisions and I could help out by signing Caroline`s No Disclosure` decisions, and Scott could sign off their `Disclosure` decisions.
These were `worse case scenario` suggestions, but as they were the only suggestions on the table, those were the ones they went for.
26th October 2013 - one month further on and this arrangement is not working, in Glenrothes and Stirling and nor in other Divisions throughout Scotland.
I am struggling to keep up with the `No Disclosure` sign offs. The Social Work and NHS checks are a massive burden on the Unit and will have to a back seat as the Unit starts to address the 76 old ORI`s which have to be fully reviewed, to ensure that that information is still current, relevant and proportionate for Disclosure, and updated from `Fife Constabulary` to `The Police Service of Scotland`.
At this point in time, the workload in Stirling is only being signed off thanks to Caroline and DI Stuart Allan (who is not supposed to be signing off).
The position in the remainder of the country is not much better, 
In Edinburgh, Douglas Wright has retired, leaving Mike Webster to set up to run the Unit and sign off the `No Disclosures` with Rachel and her deputy signing off the `Disclosures`.
In Aberdeen, Keith Forrest has put in for his Retirement and expects to finish on the 15th November. The Compliance Officer is training up to be able to sign off `No Disclosures` with Iain Gray signing the `Disclosures`. Keith expects 2 or 3 of the remaining staff to take Voluntary Redundancy leaving possibly one or two in the Unit.
In Dundee, Insp Derek Hogg retires on the 15th November, leaving Ron Stephen to sign off.
In Dumfries, Dave and Christine Kilpatrick have both applied for Voluntary Redundancy, which will leave only Kjerstie Jardine in the Unit.
In Glasgow, it is expected that possibly 4 will take Voluntary Redundancy.
If the Management Structure for PVG, which had been agreed and signed off in November 2012 had been adopted then tweaked to make it work, we would have been in a better stronger posoition today.
As it stands, a National QAF Database is looking like a essential requirement, and not a `good to have`!
The Way Forward
A National QAF Database, which will link all PVG Units in Scotland.
A minimum of 3 Signatories in each Hub, North, East and West, to sign off `No Disclosures`. These posts will require to be appropriatley funded.
A minimum of 2 Delegated Signatories in each Hub to sign off `Disclosures` and other paperwork generated by the PVG Units.
All PVG Disclosure Units appropriatley staffed, based not just on the number of applications received from Disclosure Scotland, but also taking into account the volume of `Continuous Monitoring` generated by each Unit.
If the PVG Units are not properly staffed or funded, then the Police Service of Scotland will no longer be able to fulfill this legislative requirement.




