The Life and Times

Grandmother:- Ethel Thorneycroft or Powell
When her husband John Powell joined the army and was sent overseas in 1916, Ethel Maria (Thorneycroft) Powell applied for a job at the Railway Station in Larbert. She was hired and became the first female Railway Porter. She was paid 19 shillings per week.
September 3, 1917
1917
Ethel Maria Thorneycroft as a porter with the Caledonian Railway Company 1917

Grandfather:- John Powell – Moulder died before I was born

John Powell – Uncle – Larbert Laundry Manager – married Bessie – moved to Malton, N.Yorks to manage a Laundry, later retired to Scarborough. Had two daughters, Elizabeth? who worked in TV and married a Maltese, and …...........

Fred Powell -Uncle – bachelor – Bricklayer – emigrated in 1933 to Bulawayo, Rhodesia. When Ian Smith Leader of white minority government started to loose power, Fred moved to Johannesburg, prior to independence from the UK. Robert Mugabe took over the country which was renamed Zimbabwe. Fred later moved on retirement to Durban, where he died. Fred always sent each of his nephews and nieces a shoebox full of sweets every Christmas. In December 1973, Fred came down from Jo’burg to visit Sheilagh, Jackie and I in Fishhoek, on the pretence that he had come to go to the horse races in Cape Town. Sheilagh and I took Fred down to the shops to see if we could buy him a Christmas present. Everything we suggested, shirt, pants, socks, he bought by the box or by the dozen. We passed a shop with a tray of pipes in the window. As Fred smoked the pipe, I dragged him in and bought him one. Fred asked if I'd ever thought about smoking a pipe, and I said my grand-dad smoked and I always liked the smell. I came out of that shop with a pipe as well. That was the start of 25 years smoking the pipe.

Abe Powell – Uncle – Iron Moulder, Larbert Iron Works – married Ena, two children, John and …........, a School Teacher. Abe left school at 12 with no qualifications. Was an expert gardener (dahlias) and regularly appeared on a Radio Talk Show. aa On retirement, Abe and Ena started taking foreign holidays. This gave Abe a thirst for foreign languages. He started night-school in Stirling and ended up with highers in Spanish, French, Italian, German and probably a few others.

Lily Powell – Aunt – spinster – resided with grandma Powell – incident with tomato sauce bottle in McLaughlin Street one tea-time.

Doris Powell or Harrower – Aunt – married Harry Harrower, a Teacher from Falkirk, two children, a son, and a daughter – emigrated to Montreal, Canada in mid-1950s.

Mary Powell or Linton – Aunt – married Tommie Linton, a Painter & Decorator from Southend-on-Sea, two children, Ian and Suzie – emigrated to Toronto? Canada, in the mid-1950s. Didn't last long. Came home when I was in P6, Larbert Primary, and we stayed in Glenbervie Avenue, Larbert. Ian came into my class. He was good at arithmetic. Ian married Doreen and have two children. Ian works as a Technical Author. He is a folk singer and blames me for taking him to his first concert (The Corries) in Leith Town Hall. Tommie got a job as a Milk Delivery Man in Boness and they stayed in a farm cottage. Remember Uncle John and Auntie Bessie turned up one Christmas Eve with a turkey, so big it wouldn't fit in the oven so Tommie and Mary had to take it back to their farm cottage and cook it in their oven. I had answered the door and didn't recognise Uncle John. Tommie and Mary bought a house in Tryst Road, Stenhousemuir. He painted the outside walls so the house stood out. It was the only one in the street with painted walls. They eventually moved back down to Southend-on-Sea. Tommie was a footballer all his days. Remember dad complaining that every time Tommie drove the car, he drove along with the 'cat's eyes' in the middle of the road, so the car vibrated.

Larbert to Dundee.

1961 – We moved from Larbert to Dundee. Dad was working as a Manager at Hoover in the area office in Stirling. He got a job as Company Staff Trainer at Lawson Brothers Department Store, Whitehall Crescent, Dundee. We moved into McLean Street, Dundee because as we came from a Council House in Larbert, Dundee City Council wouldn't give us a Council house. The 1st floor flat-backed onto open scrub. At that time, McLean Street was at the top end of Dundee, with open countryside towards the Sidlaw Hills and the radio masts.

Index

My name is James Rae McNicol. My parents are Matthew John McNicol, a Motorcycle Mechanic, 3 George Terrace, Camelon and Elsie May Powell, a Laundry Worker, 34 James Street, Stenhousemuir. They were married on 7th August 1948 at Irvine Church, Camelon.

I was born on the 4th of October 1949. When mum went into labour with me, the local hospital, Falkirk Infirmary, had no spare beds in the Maternity Wing, so she was sent to Airthrey Castle Maternity Hospital, Bridge of Allan, where I was born at 11.30 pm. Airthrey Castle, which is now the Administrative Offices of Stirling University became a Maternity Hospital during World War II.

Following his War Service, dad worked as a motorcycle mechanic at a motorcycle shop in Falkirk.
The next job was to define his occupation for the rest of his life. Dad joined Hoover as a salesman, working out of a dealership in Stirling. He rose to Area Manager.
1949 - 1953: James Street, Stenhousemuir

My first home was 34 James Street, Stenhousemuir which was shared with Grandma Powell & Auntie Lilly.
1949 – 1953 - 2nd home: - James Street, Stenhousemuir, tenement with an outside toilet, which was shared with the next-door neighbours, was on back stair landing. The flat was opposite my grandmother's home. The heating was open coal fires.

Earliest memory was Christmas 1953 when I got a clockwork train set. Dad, his brother Bill and I had it set up on the bedroom carpet when mum came into the room and gave us a row for putting chips of coal in the trucks. About this time, Grandma Powell & Auntie Lilly moved to the flat at 2 McLaughlin Street, Stenhousemuir.

1953 - 1959: 10 Braeview, Stenhousemuir.

3rd home: - 10 Braeview, Stenhousemuir – we needed more space. This was a semi-detached two-bedroom council house on a big corner plot. I started school, Larbert Central Primary at Stenhousemuir when we were at this house. When the new Stenhousemuir Primary School opened, I went there for two years. I remember the Boyd brothers, Janice Dougal, Yvonne White, Alan Dunbar and a few others from my class. It was close to the McCowan's Toffee factory and the smell would go all through the school.

Liz was born in 1958. I remember mum putting her outside in the pram for a sleep during the day, even in the winter weather. I used to take Liz out in the pram for a walk. Dad and I built a large balsa wood glider which was covered with varnished tissue paper. It only flew once.
My pal, Alex Gorrie stayed opposite the house. He was in my class at school. The Rutherford's lived opposite as well.

The first car I remember was an Austin A7. The Rutherford's and the McNicol's, 4 adults and 3 children, piled into the car with luggage and drove down to Scarborough for a two week holiday. We had to get out at the bottom of Sutton Bank, a very steep hill in North Yorkshire, and push the car up the hill. We stayed with Uncle John and Auntie Bessie. Uncle John, my mum's elder brother, was the manager of a Laundry in Norton, just outside Scarborough. 

Our next-door neighbours in Braeview were the McGill's who owned the paper shop opposite the Plough Hotel, on Main Street, Stenhousemuir. Mr McGill worked in the Oil Industry based at the refinery in Grangemouth and his sons ran the shop.

I remember Dad bought a Ford Anglia and later a black Rover 90. Much more space inside. There were very few cars about at that time.

One time, dad bought some turf from a house further down the scheme and I spent days bringing it home in my guider. It was all uphill.

I had a mongrel dog which used to run out of the house and come and meet me on my way home from school at lunch-time.

I remember the summer's being so hot that the black tar on the roads used to melt and stick to my shoes. I used to play football down the park, The Lido. The main pond was full of minnows, with families of swans on the island in the centre. There was another smaller pond on the east side full of tadpoles. There was a hilly bank off Valeview where we used to sledge in winter when the snow was on the ground. On the west side of the park, there was a large toilet block near to the tennis courts and putting greens.

On the east side of Braeview, behind the houses, there was a large area of open gorse land where I spent hours playing, building gang huts.

One of my daily jobs was to go round to the corner shop at the corner of Braeview and Valeview to get half a stone of potatoes and a loaf of bread. There is still a shop there. Every Saturday morning I was sent over to the local butcher's shop on Main Street, to get frying steak for lunch.

On Saturday afternoon, it was the matinee at the Picture House on Main Street.

A large brown coloured greengrocers van came round every Saturday and I used to climb aboard and go round a couple of streets to help the driver.

Sunday morning we went to Church up by the school. I was a member of the Cubs at the Church.

One Sunday, must have been close to Remembrance Day, dad gave me his army medals to take them over to let Grannie Powell and Aunt Lilly see them. When I got over to the house I realised I had dropped some of them. I started, in a panic, to retrace my steps and luckily found them at the back of the tenement on James Street where we used to stay. I had run through the back gardens taking a shortcut.

1959 - 1961: 11 Glenbervie Avenue, Larbert.

4th home: - 11 Glenbervie Avenue, Larbert – larger house with an extra bedroom. I went to Larbert Primary for a year, then back to Larbert Central for 1st year of secondary school. I got my first job delivering papers for the shop next door to Larbert Primary School. Had a bike with butterfly handlebars and a parcel carrier on the back. Sunday's were terrible with the weight on the papers. I could never remember which house got which paper, so the shop owner had to write the house number on the corner of each paper every morning.

There was a farm around the corner on Bellsdyke Road, where at 4 pm, we could buy warm fresh unpasteurised milk straight from the cow.

Mary (mum’s sister) and Tommie Linton with Ian and Susie came back from Canada. Tommie had a job as a milkman in Boness before the family moved back down to Southend-on-Sea.

1961 - 1963: 16 McLean Street, St. Mary's, Dundee.
5th home: - 16 McLean Street, St Mary’s, Dundee – the family moved to Dundee because dad got a job with the Lawson Brothers store in Whitehall Crescent, Dundee as Company Staff Trainer, responsible for training door to door salesmen.

I went to Kirkton High School. I had to repeat 1st year as it was thought the Dundee education system was different from Larbert Central. I got a job delivering butcher meat for David Robb, Butcher, 468 Strathmartine Road, Dundee. He had an old butchers bike with the big basket on the front. It was a nightmare to use for deliveries.On Saturday afternoons I would wash and clean out his VW Beetle. He was a chain smoker and the inside stank of nicotine. He used to boil up large joints of brisket in the back shop and sell it as roast beef. Another trick was to have his machines cleaned by moon on Saturdays and if a customer came in and asked for a half pound of steak minced, he would cut a piece of steak off the haunch on the counter, walk through into the back shop, lay the steak on the tray by the mincer, switch on the mincer  pick up some previously minced steak and take it through to the customer.

I was three years at Kirkton High and that where I started playing rugby.  Was 2nd Row Forward alongside Jim Norrie, who had lived over in Canada. 

1963 - 1964: St. Mary's Road, Downfield, Dundee.
6th home: - 11 St Mary’s Road, Downfield, Dundee – this was the first house mum and dad bought. The price was £4500. It was a semi-detached and the next-door neighbour was Miss Bett, of the building firm, Bett the Builders. There was a large monkey puzzle tree in her front garden.

1963 - MV Devonia - Dundee to Reykjavik, Andlesnes, Trondheim, Bergen.
The cruise was organised and led by Hugh Millar the Head Gym Teacher at Kirkton High School. We left from Dundee and sailed north towards Reykjavik. Passing the Faeroes, we encountered a force 7 gale. Most of the kids on board were seasick, but I felt OK and spent most of my time on deck watching the sea.
Iceland was a beautiful but sparse country and very expensive.
Norway was really beautiful, sailing up the fjords. Outstanding scenery and again, very expensive.

1964 - MV Dunera - LA Coruna, Tangier, Lisbon
Again the party was led by Hugh Millar. We sailed south down through the English Channel and stopped at LA Coruna in northwest France where we disembarked. After a short stay, we sailed for Tangier. Man, that was hot! Last port was Lisbon.

It was during this cruise that I banged my head going down a gangway (stair) on ahead height deck frame. To this day I still have a bump on the top of my head.

1964 - 1970: 16 Seaview Crescent, Joppa, Edinburgh.
7th home: - 16 Seaview Terrace, Joppa, Edinburgh (cost £6000) – the family moved to Joppa from Dundee when dad was promoted to Branch Manager at the Lothian Road, Edinburgh branch of Lawson Brothers. Mum worked part-time in the local shoe shop in Portobello. After 2 or 3 years, Lawson Brothers were taken over by a Jewish concern, who sacked all existing senior management. Dad started with Amplivox Hearing Aids in the hearing acoustics division, demonstrating and selling booths and equipment for testing hearing. He covered an area from Hull to Liverpool north to Orkney and Shetland. It became apparent that the majority of his work was in the north of England and mum, dad and Liz moved to Ripon in Yorkshire. 

In 1966, I was at Portobello Secondary School studying for my O'Levels (4th Year). I was playing rugby with Jack Ewing, Dougie Scott and Nicky Nicholson to name but a few. Also in my class was Shirley McKinlay who later married Alan Roy.

Before sitting my O'Levels I applied to Edinburgh City Police for a Police Cadetship, but I didn't receive a reply. By the time I had sat my O'Levels, English, Geography, Technical Drawing and Metalwork, I decided I wanted to join the Merchant Navy as a DeckHand and started to get the paperwork for Leith Nautical College together for my dad to sign. Jack had started a Fitting Apprenticeship with Brown Brothers (Steering Gear) of Edinburgh. Dougie Scott joined the Royal Navy as a Diver and was stationed on Submarines. Nicky started an Apprenticeship as an Electrician.

About this time my dad was applying to become a member of Duddingston Golf Club. His sponsor was a neighbour, Jim McKay, who was the Postmaster at Joppa Post Office. Dad was over speaking with Jim McKay one evening when the subject of what I was going to do when I left school came up. Dad said I was going to Leith Nautical College with the intention of joining the Merchant Navy as a DeckHand. Jim McKay's wife's second cousin was Jim Watson, the Engineering Manager in Henry Robb's Shipyard in Keith. If I was interested in engineering, she could ask if I could get an apprenticeship. I would be five years in total, four in the shipyard and one in the Merchant Navy.

My dad told me that he didn't care what I did with my life as long as I had a trade to fall back on.

I agreed and I had to go in for an apprenticeship interview on Thursday. I reported into Robb's for the interview at 9 am. I was directed to the engineering workshop. There was a steel roller shutter door with a metal single door to the right-hand side. I went through the single door. The wood and glass Foreman's office was just inside the door to the right, with another office (Fitters Afloat) above. The workshop was very quiet, it was tea-break. I had a feeling that someone was looking at me. I looked up and saw three pairs of eyes looking down. Jim Watson, Jim Mackay and the Foreman Afloat. Eventually, Jim Mackay came downstairs. I introduced myself and said I was there for an interview for an Apprenticeship. He said I'd just had it and asked when I could start. I said Monday and he said to make it Tuesday 24th May 1966, as Monday is a public holiday.

When I started, I was put with Willie, an old bench fitter. He must have been close to retirement age, at least in his early 60's. We worked together on and off over the four years. The other bench fitters were Henry and Jock. There was a turner who had a newish lathe for detailed brass turning only. The main turners were situated on a mezzanine floor. The large lathes were on. the ground floor along with a big rotary capstan lathe, milling machines, a small pillar drill and a large pillar drill. The marker-off had a large steel table and I later found out that he was paid 6p an hour more than the other fitters.

My first wage was £3 10/- a week for a 40 hour week.

As soon as I was 17, I bought a BSA Bantam 125cc motorbike to get back and forward to work.

I was friendly with one of the apprentice turners, called Ian Renwick. He had a scooter and we'd go away on runs together and one year we had a camping trip up to Loch Lomond finishing off at granny McNicol's house in Camelon.

One of the other apprentice fitters was Andy Thomson from Maddison near Falkirk. He used to travel back and forward in a Bond Bug 3 wheeler car. Andy joined Christian Salvesen as an Engine Room Boy at 15 then after a year, decided to do an apprenticeship to go as a Junior Engineer, so we had a lot in common. Andy worked with an old fitter called Jock, who did most of the big heavy jobs, but Andy was accident-prone. 

There was one weekend he was out with friends in his Bond Bug when he rolled it. As it was fibreglass, the body split, so his pals had to lie in the back holding the body together so he could get home. He repaired it with pop rivets. 

Another time, Jock and Andy were working on the cross-head off a Doxford Engine in the workshop. They had to put the main pin back in the frame. The pin was about 10" in diameter and about 18" long (from memory). They entered the pin in the bearing, then Andy picked up a length of wood, cut off a railway sleeper, and went to knock the pin in. The only problem was, he had his thumb at the from of the baton. Of course, he smashed up his thumb. He lost the finger from the knuckle joint.

The following year, Andy and I were working together in the Tool Room. We made metal templates for Ronnie on the profile burning machine. One day, Jim MacKay, the Foreman came in with a 1" dia leather washer which was about half an inch thick and asked if it could be split in two. Andy took the washer, started the band saw and proceeded to cut it in half. Once the cut got into the middle of the band saw grabbed the leather and jerked. Andy cut off the bottom part of his other thumb. I heard him say "shit, I've done it again" before running to the nursing station.

As part of my apprenticeship, I was sent on day release to study for City and Guilds in Mechanical Engineering. The first two years were spent at the Telford College of Further Education on Moira Terrace, Portobello, now converted into flats, and the second two years at Napier College of Science and Technology on Clinton Road, Edinburgh, now Napier University. It was only when on day release that I picked up on maths. The penny dropped when the teacher, a Norwegian, showed how to work out the feeds and speeds of lathes and drilling machines. Work I was doing in the shipyard. I passed both Part 1 (May/June 1968) and Part 2 (May/June 1970) of the City and Guilds with Credit.

I spent a fair bit of my time during my apprenticeship on the big pillar drill, drilling holes up to 3" dia. That's when I had to learn how to sharpen a drill, a skill I've retained to this day. 

I also had a spell on the rotary castle lathe mainly making the large engine hold-down bolts.

I spent quite a while in the Tool Room making templates for the burning machines. Jim MacKay would come in with a large ship's drawing and tell me to see what we had to produce in the fitting shop. Because I could read a technical drawing, I was able to negotiate with the Foreman Plater and the Foreman Blacksmith so there was no duplication. This was when I learned to swear. If I hadn't they wouldn't talk to me.

The fitter in the Toolroom was a young lad, Ronnie McDonald. A bit of a chancer, but likeable. He stayed on a boat tied up on the Water of Leith off Coburg Street. He owned a Thames 15cwt van. One lunchtime he asked me to give him a hand to change the drum brakes on all four wheels. I didn't think it could be done, but we did it in just under an hour. I always fancied buying a Thames 15cwt van, putting a single mattress in the back and driving over to Spain to work in a bar for the summer.

One summer I was asked if I wanted to work during the Trades fortnight when traditionally the shipyard shut down. The job was in a Whisky Bond just off Constitution Street. We were treated like any of the Bond's workers in that at 10 o'clock we were given a free dram by the Bond Foreman. That turned out to be a good holiday job.

During my time in the shipyard, I used to go out for lunch. There was a wee cafe just outside the dock gates on North Junction Street, where I could get a hot meal. There was no choice on the menu. Take it or leave it! There is still a cafe there today. The Seaman's Mission on The Shore, just outside the dock gates, did a good meal but it meant running back to work as the place was always mobbed. The mother of one of the apprentice Turners had a nice cafe on Constitution Street. If I was more than three minutes late clocking on, I lost 15 minutes pay. More than three minutes I was locked out for 15 minutes and lost 30 minutes of pay. Any longer than 15 minutes you were sent home and lost the days pay.

I remember keeping a 10/- note back and going to the Steam Boat Tavern for two pies and a pint on a Friday lunchtime. The pub was always mobbed and if you wanted your pies you had to be quick. The Steamboat Tavern was a favourite of the girls from the Whisky Bonds. A really rough, loud bunch.

Andy Thomson finished his apprenticeship a few weeks before me. I had secured a position as a Junior Engineering Officer with the Ben Line of Edinburgh on the Far East run. Andy was going back with Salvesens again on the far east run. We made a pact that we'd meet up somewhere in the far east and have a few beers.

When I came to the end of my apprenticeship on the 20th May 1970, Jim Watson, the Engineering Manager gave me a small blue book on Marine Diesel Engines and told me to study it.

I was always expected to give my mum dig money on a Friday when I got paid, but she helped me save up for my summer holiday abroad.

My first foreign holiday was with Jack Ewing. We were flying from Newcastle to Costa Brava in Spain. I remember we had three or four pints of beer in Newcastle before going out to the airport for Dutch courage as neither of us had flown before. We went to Salou, now the Blackpool of the Costas, but back in my day, there was only one hotel there, all on its own. We had a half-mile walk along the beach to the nearest hamlet where there was a local bar. We had two weeks full board including flights and transfers for £68 each. A lot of money in the late '60s. The following year Jack, Jimmy Young, a friend from school and Gino's Cafe in Portobello, and I went back to Spain, but to another resort. Can't remember much about it.

During my apprenticeship years from 1966 to 1970, Jack and I used to hang out at a cafe in Portobello owned by two Italian brothers, Gino and Nino Nicora. Nino worked in The Scotsman newspaper and helped Gino out. The cafe was the centre of our social life.

When I left school I played rugby with Jack Ewing, Nicky Nicolson, Dougie Scott and others whose names I've forgotten, for Portobello FP's (former pupils) 2nd team.

We were also regulars at Portobello Baths. 

We started to go to the folk singing in the Lochview Hotel, in Royal Terrace, Edinburgh with Dougie Gemmel, who sang there. I used to give Dougie a hand with his gear and I got a lift in his car.

About 1969, Alan and Shirley Roy (McKinley) came back from South Africa. They went out around 1967 with Shirley's mum and dad, Dora and Jack and her two sisters, Carol and Val. Alan, who had served his apprenticeship in Marconi as an Electrician, worked for STC (Standard Telephones and Cables) on the radio systems on Minesweepers. After about 18 months the decision was made to come back to Scotland, as Alan wanted to get in on the birth of computing. They rented a large flat in Brunswick Street, Edinburgh. Alan got a job as a Technician at Heriot-Watt University's Computer Lab and studied at night school to gain the qualifications needed to study computing.

While at Brunswick Street, Shirley gave birth to two girls, Gillian and Susan

As the flat was very close to the Lochview Hotel, we would go down once the hotel closed for cheese and biscuits and coffee. This was when I copied Alan and started drinking black coffee. I remember one Saturday Alan and Shirley were throwing a party. Alan asked if I had anything for playing music. I only had a small cassette player. Alan asked me to take it round in the afternoon. He found a plastic photo slide box and a pile of resistors, transistors and volume control. With his soldering iron, he put together a small amplifier which worked great.

On the 10th of July 1970, I joined the Ben Line of Edinburgh. I had to go to a Merchant Navy outfitters on Constitution Street, Leith. I had to put it on and get my photograph taken in the back garden.

Dougie Scott was home on leave from the Royal Navy. He invited me up to his house in Duddingston Village, just round from the Sheep's Heid Pub, to give me some tips on Hong Kong. Dougie had been out there with the Submarine Squadron for 18 months. Dougie mentioned the Peninsular Hotel opposite the Star Ferry. He said not to go in the front door as it was very expensive, rather go round the back to where I'd find the entrance to the public bar, much cheaper. He said if I was going on a night out, the place to go was The Yellow Submarine disco bar on xxxxxxxx Street. Dougie said there was only one Fish & Chip shop in Hong Kong on xxxxx Street, which was called the Hasty Tasty. This was opposite a pub called the Waltzing Matilda, run by an Australian of course. He said I should go into the pub and order a beer. A wee boy or wee girl would appear with a menu for the Hasty Tasty. They would take your order and serve your meal on a plate. You paid them along with a tip for their service.

The time came for me to leave Henry Robbs and join my ship. I got a night train from Edinburgh to London Kings Cross. I made my way to the taxi rank and asked to be taken to Tilbury Docks to join the MV Benvalla. She was Benloyal Class, built by D. Rowan & Co Ltd, Glasgow and finished by C. Connell & Co Ltd Glasgow, Yard No 497. A steel motor vessel, 11,391 gross tons, 6,582 net tons and 13,090 deadweight tonnage. Length 550ft x 71ft x 34ft. She was powered by a Sulzer RD70 engine producing 15000bhp capable of 20 knots. She was sold to the People's Republic of China on 11th January 1972 and renamed YICHUN, then in 1977 renamed HAU CHUN.

I walked up the gang-plank, but there was no one around. I dumped my bags and found my way down to the engine room where I bumped into a big Yorkshireman, the 5th Engineer. I remember one of the things he asked me.  He said, "do you smoke?" I said "no", and he replied, "well if you don't start while working in the engine room, you'll never start".

I was allocated the 7th Engineers cabin. It had a single bunk, a small settee under the porthole, a desk with a chair and a single wardrobe. There was a curtain over the door for the warm climates.

We had to dress in whites before entering the Officers Dining Saloon and the Officer's Bar. We were allowed draught beer, but we weren't allowed any spirits on board.

I remember the Chief Engineer, P.J. Davies, sending me to the shops with £20 to buy board games for the Officers Mess.

We sailed from London to Hamburg then across to Grangemouth. We sailed up the Forth, under the Forth Rail Bridge and the Forth Road Bridge. To get into the port at Grangemouth the ship had to go through a very narrow dock entrance.

I was on watch in the engine room. The 4th Engineer I was working with put me in charge of keeping the air compressors running at full volume. The reason for this was that the bridge staff were having a great deal of trouble negotiating the entrance to the dock. The ship's telegraph was constantly going from half-ahead to half-astern. At one point the 5th Engineer, who was on the engine controls turned to the 2nd Engineer and said: "goin' get on to that idiot on the bridge and tell him there's enough air for two movements left and one's full-stop". We barely scraped through before the engine stopped.

I ended up doing boiler-watch once we had tied up alongside. I went up for my break about 0300hrs. As I walked along the seamen's alleyway, I saw a woman dressed in a leopard skin coat standing at the door of one of the seaman's cabins. As I passed there was another one in the cabin. As I turned the corner I heard laughter from the seaman's mess. The door was open and I saw two uniformed Police Officers sitting drinking with some of the seamen.

The coast lasted seven weeks and included London, Hamburg, Grangemouth, Rotterdam and Antwerp. 

Once we were empty and tied up in Antwerp, we started stripping down the engine, a Sulzer RD70. The engine was three stories high, had ten cylinders, each a metre in diameter. The bottom camshaft bearing cradles were floating, the welding had cracked on most of the saddles and they had brought the ship back from the Far East in that condition at 20 knots.

Our drinking hole in Antwerp was Annie's Bar just outside the docks. I remember they had Watneys Red Barrel (English beer) on draught. The only problem was that they put it through the same chiller as the local Belgian beer and it froze in the pipes.

Experts from Sulzer were brought in to weld the new saddles into place and bore out the white metal bearings to a laser line.

On the 4th of November 1970, after fourteen weeks in Antwerp, I flew home for two weeks leave. I was the last officer on board who was going deep-sea and entitled to leave. I flew from Antwerp up to Rotterdam in an old prop-driven Dakota aeroplane with pop rivets in the wings. The plane had bus style seats and there were only four passengers, including me. The next flight was over to London then up to Edinburgh.

On the 25th November 1970, after my leave, I got the train down to London, and this time, once I got to Kings Cross, I went looking for a particular taxi driver, who always looked after the Ben Line staff. He only took £2 per trip down to the ship instead of the normal £5. I found a taxi driver and was told to put my bag in the cab and go to a greasy-spoon cafe just outside the station and get some breakfast as he was waiting on the train from Wales before we left for the ship.

The cargo was partly loaded in London then we sailed to Southampton where more cargo was loaded. While we were in Southampton, Jack Ewing and his journeyman came on board to service the ship's steering gear. It was great to see Jack again if only for a couple of hours.

We sailed from Southampton across the Atlantic Ocean to Panama. The Canal was very narrow, even for a ship the size of the Benvalla, but we were pulled through the locks by the mechanical mules, small diesel engines, running on a track parallel to the edge of the locks. We passed by an abandoned floating power station, in the middle of the passage. One of the boys on board said it was unclear, but I'm not so sure. It was a grey ship with no bridge or portholes showing. It took most of the day to traverse the Canal, then into the Pacific Ocean and headed for Japan.

Our first port in Japan was Kobe. We tied up alongside the harbour wall. About 1600hrs, I was in the Officer's bar when I overheard the Radio Officer talking about a friend who was on a Christian Salvesen ship which was anchored off in the Roads (off, out of the port). I asked what the name of the ship was and I realised that Andy Thomson was on board. The Radio Officer said he was going to set up a ship to shore to ship telephone link (the days well before mobile phones) at 1900hrs. I spoke again to the Radio Officer after his phone call and he confirmed Andy was on board, but he had gone ashore about 1830hrs on a jolly boat (taxi) for a night out somewhere in Kobe with his crewmates and in the morning they were doing a boiler inspection then going deep sea. 
I had missed Andy by about 30 minutes on the other side of the world!
I went ashore with some of the guys off the ship. We ended up in a bar in a weird area with flora wreaths lying about everywhere. The bar owner was an Australian who said it was the death of a member of one of the local powerful gang members, known as the Yakuza. He advised us not to hang about. We didn't. Before we left Kobe we took on two passengers. We could carry a maximum of twelve passengers without a Doctor on board.
Two Canadian passengers came on board heading for Singapore.
The next port we went to in Japan was Kobe. I remember we tied up alongside and I was on a 6a - 6 pm boiler watch. I went up to get something out of my cabin about 10 am and I saw a young Japanese girl in the alleyway with an open suitcase displaying samples of crockery. I asked one of the older engineers what the story was and was told that if I gave her the equivalent of £6 in Yen I could buy a 12 piece dinner service. All I had to do was pick the size of the plates and cups and the design to go on them and she would fetch them from the factory. I thought this would be a nice present for my mum so I spoke to the lady. I returned to my cabin about 12 noon to find the dinner service in a cardboard box all tied up with a customs certificate lying on my bunk.
Our next port was Pusan in South Korea. As we approached the harbour there was a small wooden skiff alongside the starboard side with a couple of guys in it. I was up on deck and I could hear them shouting, asking for scrap metal and soap. Some of the crew were throwing nuts and bolts at them trying to chase them away.
I heard later on that while this distraction was ongoing, another skiff was on the port side with a long bamboo pole which a young lad used to climb up and through the engine room workshop porthole, which had been left open and had stolen some brass and steel rods.
A couple of days later we arrived in Hong Kong. We tied up on the Kowloon side, not far from the Star Ferry Terminal. I went ashore with big Sandy, the Ship’s Bosun. We headed straight for the Yellow Submarine pub. The place was mobbed. We got a couple of beers and sat at a table. I noticed Sandy looking past me, over my shoulder. He got up and excused himself and made his way over to a guy who was at the back of the room. When he came back, he said that he knew the bloke from the village they stayed in in the Outer Hebrides. The guy was a Police Constable and was stationed in the New Territories up near the border with China. He had a Land Rover sitting outside the pub and an MGB GT at his apartment.
We had an English family come aboard heading back to London. The guy worked as a Translator for the Home Office. He had been deployed to listen to the Chinese radio broadcasts looking for any intelligence. He had his wife and young son with him.
Our next port was xxxxx in Taiwan. We got there on Chinese New Year. We dropped anchor in the Roads, well away from the harbour. Once again I found myself on the 6 am to 6 pm boiler watch. This time it was lucky for me. Because we sailed with a Chinese crew, it was a tradition that they would supply the white officers with alcohol, all spirits. If you asked for a whisky, for example, the glass would be filled to the rim and you were expected to knock it back in a one's by giving the toast " yam sing". As a result, I was the only sober officer on board that afternoon.
After dinner, a 'jolly-boat' came alongside to tasks a few of us ashore for a night on the town. About 20 of us went down the gangway and climbed on board including the two Canadian passengers we had picked up in Japan. Just as these passengers climbed on board, someone appeared at the top of the gangway and shouted that the Captain wanted to speak with them. They went back onto the ship and disappeared. About 10 mins later, the owner of the jolly-boat, keen to get underway, ran up the gangway to look for the missing passengers. A few minutes later, I was standing at the aft end of the jolly-boat, away from the gangway when I heard someone shout, "let go aft, let go forward'. Assuming the owner of the jolly-boat was back on board, I untied the aft rope holding us to the ship and off we set.
As we pulled away from the Ben Valla, I saw the figure of the jolly-boat owner on the gangway shouting for us to go back to the ship. Confused, I had a look in the wheelhouse and saw the 4th Engineer at the wheel with the 2nd Engineer, both pissed, trying to steer the boat towards the lights of the shore.

Mariners Club, Connell House, Anson Road, Singapore. /

On 15th March 1971 paid off in London as 7th Engineer
On 16th March 1971 promoted to 5th Engineer
On 6th May 1971 paid off in London as 5th Engineer
On 4th June 1971 5th Engineer
On 15th July 1971 paid off as 5th Engineer
F.W. Woolworth & Co August to December 1971
Between 10th January 1972 to 28th December 1972 Robb Caledon
South Africa
At a visit by Sheilagh and I to Alan & Shirley's flat in Brunswick Street in Edinburgh, Alan showed an 8mm film of Fish Hoek and Simmons town. I was amazed by what I saw and decided there and then that I wanted to go out there.
Alan gave me the name and address of the HR Manager for STC in Simonstown, his previous employer. I wrote out to enquire about a job in Simonstown Dockyard. The letter I got back asked me to wait a few months as there was to be a recruitment drive in the UK, and I would be interviewed in Edinburgh.
Sheilagh and I attended the interview in the Post House Hotel on Queensferry Road in Edinburgh. STC was recruiting artisans for the maintenance and repair of three French Submarines for the South African Navy, as they realised there were not the trained artisans in South Africa to carry out this work.
That evening, Sheilagh and I were having a drink in the XXXX Hotel on Links field, Musselburgh. We were talking about the interview, and both of us were enthusiastic, so I proposed by saying, "I'm going out to South Africa, so if you are coming, we'd better get married first". She said "yes".
On Wednesday the 2nd January 1973, Sheilagh and I boarded a plane at Edinburgh Airport bound for London Heathrow. All of Sheilagh's family and friends from Edinburgh were there to see us away. It was Sheilagh's first flight, but she was more worried about saying goodby than the actual flight. The night before, Sheilagh's gran gave us two massive pit towels. To get them in our cases, we had to wear out Arran cardigans, knitted by my mum, on the flight.
At Heathrow, my mum and dad were waiting on us, having driven down from Ripon. We had a meal with them, then flew out of  Heathrow at 5.30 pm headed for Johannesburg. We landed in Isla de Sol in the Cape Verde islands to refuel around midnight. The next stop was Salisbury in Rhodesia at about 7.30 am. When the aeroplane doors opened it was like stepping into an oven. After a short stopover, we took off for Johannesburg. As we passed over the Oranje River into South Africa, the pilot made an announcement over the tannoy and there was a loud cheer in the plane. Obviously a lot of South African’s heading home after Christmas in the UK. After a stopover in Johannesburg, we took an internal flight down to Cape Town, arriving on Thursday afternoon, where we were met by a driver from STC with a minibus. There was another couple in the minibus with us. The driver seemed to take us through a Township with corrugated iron huts. We both wondered what we had got ourselves into. We drove down to Muizenburg, where we first saw the sea at False Bay. It was beautiful!
We were dropped off at the St James Hotel, just south of Muizenberg. As immigrants, we were allowed to stay in the hotel for four weeks. We were told that a minibus would pick us (the artisans) up on Monday morning and take us into Simonstown Dockyard and until then we were free to settle in.
Once we were settled in our room, we phoned Jack and Dora McKinlay, Shirley Roy's mum and dad. They came through and picked us up and drove us around the area.
On Friday morning Sheilagh and I took the train from St James into Fish Hoek. As we got off the train, we walked along Beach ch Road and turned into Recreation Road. The first shop we saw was an estate agent. In the window was an advertisement for a flat at No 4 De Vaal Heights. We got the keys and went up and viewed the flat and decided there and then to take it. It was a one-bedroom flat with kitchen, lounge, bedroom, bathroom and a garage. The flat was just around the corner from Jack and Dora who stayed at 3-2nd Crescent.
When we told Jack and Dora about the flat, Jack asked what furniture we had coming out. When we said nothing, that we were just married, Jack offered to help us out. He was the Joinery Workshop axle in a major construction company in Cape Town. Jack told us to buy a mattress and give him the dimensions and he'd make us a bed base. He went better than that. He made us a bed base, a kitchen table, a coffee table and a sideboard. The coffee table and the sideboard we're made out of internal doors.
On Monday 8th January 1973 I walked into the Submarine Workshop in Simonstown Dockyard along with about 15 other Fitters, most from the UK with a few white South Africans. I remember the starting rate of pay was R1.32 per hour. Most of us were between R1.32 and R1.35 apart from an older guy, Bill Elmer who managed to get R2 per hour, so he earned the nickname 'Billy 2 Rand'. We became firm friends.
We were met by Don Chapman, who introduced himself as the Foreman in charge of the Submarine engineering refit. Don was an ex-submariner from Birmingham who had been over to the shipyard in France for the construction of the submarines. With Don was his Technician, Bill Gordon. Don explained that we were starting from scratch and we would have a hand in setting up the workshop and all the test equipment. The test bays were the responsibility of a French Technician from the shipyard where the subs had been built.
Don pointed to a number of workbenches in the corner and a pile of vices in another corner and told us to layout the workshop as per a drawing he had. He said the Storeman would give us a drill and some bolts. There was a lathe against the wall up by the Foreman's office. The turner was Louis Pnematicatos, a Greek South African. A great guy and another good friend!
Once we got the workshop laid out and tools organised we were free to check out the dockyard. At the back of our workshop was another shed three times bigger, with an overhead gantry crane. This was the submarine shed. Outside the shed was a Synchro-lift. A wooden frame with railway lines and a cradle on wheels, connected to about ten or twelve winches down either side. They would use tugs to pull the submarine in and line it up over the cradle. The winches would lift the submarine out of the water up to ground level. Once up, they would use a Caterpillar tractor to pull the submarine into the shed, completely undercover.
The first submarine in for refit was SAS Maria Van Riebeeck, which was commissioned on the 24th July 1970. This was a Dauphine class Submarine, built in France, and based on the German U Boats. It was a diesel-electric powered with a number of batteries.
Once the submarine was safely in the shed and access staging fitted we were ready to start stripping out. Every valve, pump and part had to be stripped out and put into an individual wire basket, then taken into the workshop. The main problem here was that every component on the submarine was labelled in French. The crew all had to learn French as did Don Chapman and Bill Gordon, but none of us Fitters spoke it. A great problem was that all the technical drawings had been translated in South Africa from French through Afrikaans to English by nontechnical South Africans.
Info from Don Chapman 19th Feb 2016:-
Bill Gordon committed suicide in Durban
Don Harrison, Quality Control, committed suicide
John Koffinas died in 2014 of diabetes-related illness after having both legs amputated. Don Chapman was surprised how far John had risen in the Dockyard. He had the 'gift of the gab' and nothing else.
Ken Friar passed away as well (believed drink driving - Bill Elmer)
Don mentioned the lad who sold me the Mini (I was surprised he remembered). He's married with children but not in good health.
Don was attached to the Submarine Squadron for 30 years and worked on 19 submarine refits.
Between Monday 8th January 1973 to Tuesday 2nd March 1976, STC
Oranjemund
In January 1976, Sheilagh, Jackie, Matthew and I jumped in the car at the house in Muizenberg and drove up to Oranjemund, a distance of 837km. The N7 dual carriageway only went about 50km north of Cape Town then onto a standard two-lane road going northwards towards the regional capital of Springbok. We passed a little village every 30kms or so but in those days there were no petrol stations open during the night so we had to carry spare fuel with us. About 50km north of Springbok, at the small town of Stienkopf, we had to turn west onto a hard-packed sand road and headed about 90km over to the fishing village of Port Nolloth. From Port Nolloth the road turned north up the coast, still on hard-packed sand for 85km to Alexander Bay. Just north of Alexander Bay, we came to a check-point on the south side of the Oranje River. Once our documents were checked we had to wait until the traffic light system let us cross the single carriageway bridge. The drive into Oranjemund was on a tarred road through the desert. All of a sudden we drove into an avenue of trees with wide stretches of manicured grass on either side of the road. 
We were there to spend a weekend with Keith & Mauren Prater, old friends from our time in Fish Hoek, to see exactly what living on a diamond mine was like. Keith had managed to arrange a medical examination for me with one of the company doctors on a Saturday morning. Needless to say, we were impressed with what we saw over the weekend. A short time later, after we had returned home to Muizenberg, we had an offer of a job from Oranjemund.
We packed up the house in Muizenberg,  sold some of the furniture that Jack McKinlay had made for us, the sideboard, the coffee table etc to Wakefords, the furniture shop in Main Road, Fish Hoek, and loaded the car up. I remember the landlady came round to check the house and she was upset because we didn't give the proper 'notice to quit' and she withheld our deposit.
By the time we had finished, Sheilagh and I were both knackered.  The car was stuffed full in the back with personal and household contents, so much so that I had a roof rack on the top of the fibreglass canopy with suitcases and a wooden clothes horse tied on. We also had two 10 gallon jerry cans of petrol tied on the roof of the car.
We were invited round to Dora's in Fishhoek, for tea with the family before setting off on the drive up to Oranjemund. 
Sheilagh took the first stint at driving, from Fishhoek, up through Cape Town and onto the N7, north towards Springbok. Just after we left the dual a carriageway, which only extended about 30kms north of the city, we decided to swap drivers as Sheilagh was tired after a full day moving out of the house. By this time Matthew was asleep in the passenger footwell, and Jackie was asleep on the car bench seat, stretched out between Sheilagh and I. We made it up to Springbok by breakfast time, so we stopped at the hotel and had breakfast.
When we arrived at the security checkpoint, we went through the security checks we were given the keys for our house, No 37/2nd Avenue and a map of how to find it. It was a two-bedroom bungalow with a garage and fenced all the way around. There was a brick built shed and an orange tree in the garden. 
Oranjemund is a diamond mine owned by De Beers. It is an open cast mine, meaning that there was no underground working. Surveyors laid out where the diamonds were expected to be found. The top layer of desert sand was moved using Caterpillar belly tractors and taken about half a mile and a new sand dune created. When the sand became firmer and more compact, this was called conglomerate and the material containing diamonds. The conglomerate was loaded into 30-ton tipper trucks and taken to one of the treatment plants. Once the front end bucket loaders had moved all they could a front end bucket loader with a small 12" bucket removed as much as possible from the exposed bedrock. Once that was done, a gang of Ovambo natives with a Boss Boy went in and swept out the bedrock to recover any remaining diamonds.
I was posted to Uubvlei Treatment Plant. A bus travelled around the town in the morning and took us to the new Security Centre. The bus stop was just behind our house in 3rd Avenue. 
Six months before we arrived, Oranjemund was a closed town. No personal cars were allowed over the Orange River. They had a large number of garages alongside the Security Centre on the south side of the river. They built a new Security Centre between the town and the mine, and a wire security fence all the way up the perimeter. The mine is one mile in from the coast and 75 miles from south to north.
The bus stops outside the Security Centre and each employee had a keycard which was slid into an electronic terminal. This opened an electric door to allow access and clocked you on at the same time. On the other side of the Security Centre was a vast car park with each Plants vehicles, Land Rovers, backies and VW Minibuses mainly. The company policy was that anything greater than 1" diameter which was taken into the mine, stayed in the mine. This meant that you couldn't take a ball pein hammer through. Even vehicle tyres had to stay in the mine.
Uubvlei Treatment Plant was a very old, rusty Plant. There was one old workshop shared by Fitters, Boilermakers and Electricians. My Foreman was an elderly guy called Kotie Kruger, who was also licensed to do MoT vehicle tests from his home.
My abiding memory of my time at Uubvlei was of this boilermaker, Jose Rutter, lying on a vibrating screen, underneath the mesh screens, welding the framework while water was dripping on him and his teeth chattering. That started a friendship which spanned 44 years.
There was a funny incident one morning. One of the electricians, an Englishman called Brian, had been called out to a breakdown overnight. He drove into the workshop in a Land Rover and shouted to his Tool Boy to get the toolbag out of the car and get them cleaned. As the Tool Boy climbed into the cab, he saw a snake under the accelerator pedal, screamed and shot out of the workshop. Brian laughed, reached in and pulled out a dead Sidewinder Snake which he had run over earlier that morning out in the desert.
One day a Welshman started at Uubvlei and Katie told me to take him up to an area about 20kms north, where we had a portable diesel powered water pump, just to show him around. When we were up working on the pump there was a squad of Ovambo with a Boss Boy working in the bedrock with brushes and shovels. I asked the Boss Boy if he had found any diamonds that morning. He took a small leather pouch out of his pocket and tipped a few diamonds into the palm of his hand. Had I had picked a diamond from his hand, he would have reported me for theft and I would have lost my job and our house.
About 6 months after I started at Uubvlei, Jose and I along with several others were transferred to No 3 Plant. This was a brand new treatment plant, which we had to get ready for commissioning. My Foreman was Jerry Howsen and the Plant Engineer was Len Pretorius. There were 7 Fitters in the squad and we were each allocated a section of the Plant, which we responsible for the general day to day maintenance. 
O was allocated half of the final treatment building and the conveyor on the bing. The final treatment building was five storeys high with two identical systems. I had the west side system. The ground floor held about fifteen pumps from 3" to 12" diameter. The floors above had a series of vibrating screens, pumps and conveyors and on the very top of the building, vortex chambers. The vortexes were used to separate diamonds from sand and fine stones using ferrosilicon and water to the specific gravity of diamonds and seashells.
 Between Thursday 4th March 1976 to Thursday 29th June 1978 Oranjemund
Between Monday 28th March to Wednesday 20th April 1977, Acting Foreman No 3 Plant
Flew home from Alexander Bay on 31st July 1977 to Windhoek 1st August to Frankfurt 2nd August to London.

Between 28th August 1978 to   Precision Machining Ltd, Dalkeith
Between 16th October 1978  to 21st September 1979 Rosyth Dockyard - Test Team Work & General Fitting Duties
Police 27th September 1979 to 17th December 2005
Basic Training Course 11/79 (A) 29th October 1979 to 20th December 1979
Advanced Training Course 18/80   to 9th February 1981
27th September 1979 Cowdenbeath
29th October 1979 Tulliallan
20th December 1979 Cowdenbeath
2nd December 1980 Tulliallan
23rd January 1981 Cowdenbeath
27th May 1982 Tayport
27th July 1989 Kirkcaldy
4th June 1990 St Andrews
25th July 1991 Tayport
4th April 2002 Divisional Intelligence Unit, Cupar
2002 Temporary Detective Constable - Operation Ore - to 3rd March 2003
15th January 2005 Retired
12th January 2005 to 3rd October 2015 Disclosure Officer


1971 - 1972: 23 Brunstane Road, Joppa, Edinburgh.
1972 - 1972: 4 Cornhill Terrace, Leith, Edinburgh.
1972 - 1972: Flat in Leith, Edinburgh.

1973 - 1974: 4 De Vaal Heights, Fish Hoek, Cape Town.
1974 - 1975: 26 Rocklands Road, Murdoch Valley, Cape Town.
1975 - 1976: 2 Church Street, Muizenburg, Cape Town.
1976 - 1978: 37/2nd Avenue, Oranjemund, South West Africa.
1978 - 1979: 56 Primrose Street, Rosyth, Fife.

1979 - 1982: 16 Paul Street, Lochgelly, Fife.

1982 - 1989: 8 Mill Lane, Tayport, Fife.

1989 - 2008: 5 Reform Street, Tayport, Fife.

2008 - present: 34 Watts Gardens, Cupar, Fife.

Schools :

1955 - 1956: Larbert Central Primary School, Stenhousemuir
1956 - 1959: Stenhousemuir Primary School, Stenhousemuir
1959 - 1961: Larbert Village Primary School, Larbert
1961 - 1962: Larbert Central, Stenhousemuir
1962 - 1965: Kirkton High School, Dundee
1965 - 1966: Portobello Secondary School, Edinburgh

1966 - 1968: Tetford College of Further Education, Edinburgh
1968 - 1970: Napier College of Science and Technology, Edinburgh

Friends from my Portobello days. 

Alan & Shirley Roy
Dougie & Jean Gemmel
Jack (deceased) & Cathy Ewing
Nicky (deceased) & Rosa Nicholson
Dave & Linda Rice
Dougie Scott
Donnie Ball
Fiona Brown
Martin & Irene Lang
Sheena (Law) & Graham Addison
Ian Gray (resides London)
Judy Blackhall (deceased)
Liz Gray (deceased - resided in Canada)
Margaret Anderson (worked in the Chief Constables office) 

Apprenticeship:-

Employment :

Names:

1966
Jim McKay
James Lawson
Ronnie McDonald
Willie
Andy Thomson – Maddison – Christian Salveson

1973
Don Chapman STC
Bill Gordon- Technician
George Harrison_Quality Control
Bill Elmer
George Bell_batteries
Louis Pnematicous
Ken Friar
John Koffinas

1976
Len Pretorius
J.G. Howsen (Gerry)
H. Gray (Harry)
Chris Pick
Steve van Rensburg
Louwtjie Louw
Joseph Lubbe
Billy Mckay
Brian van Zyl
Marshal Jansen van Rensburg
 
Brian Brokke - Mud Guts?
?
?
Jose Rutter
Karl Gehrke




1979
CI Graham Bennet
Tam Wardlaw
Gordon Stark
Matt Manzie (Ballingry)
Rod Cavanagh (Ballingry Area Man)
Pete Greg (resided Lochore)
Sgt George Robertson (Georgina)
Sgt Derrick Butchart
Les (Office Man)
Jim Steel
Sandy Smart (Checking Sgt)
DI John Nicolson
Sgt Chrissie Stein
Insp Ian Cowie
Insp George Beattie
Ian McMillan-Collator
Sandy Mutch_Area Man Kelty

1982
Willie Clark
John Morrison
Jock Lowe
Alistair Top
Heath Nicol
Dave Morman
Pat Turner
SC Freddie Bremner
SC Bob Bremner
Alan Greenhill
Graham Robertson
Sid Jones
Derek Brannan
Malcolm Campbell
Callum Lawson
SC Jim Smith
SC Ian Cargill

1989
Bill Young_Sgt
Jock Lawson
Colin Wilson
Aly Donn
Sandy Gibb_Checking Sgt
Benny Lynch
Sharon Cooper
Ronnie McNaughton
Andy Walls
Insp Jim Cowie
Sgt Andy Wood
Sgt Bill Young
Rankine Leslie
Dave Hyslop (Collator)
Chris Stones (Probationer)

1994
In 1994, following a visit to the Police to the Police Convalescent Home at Harrogate and another visit to the Police Convalescent Home at Auchterarder suffering from Cervical Spondylitis I received a telephone call from Supt. Willie Drummond at Cupar. He said he was aware of the problems with my neck and asked if I was interested in computers? I said I was and he said he was looking for someone to computerise the Divisions Productions. 

When I transferred into Cupar, Inspector Eddie Devlin put me into the Fingerprint Room in the Cell Passage. I spent the first winter on the computer there, sitting on top of an electric oil filled panel heater as the room was freezing. Supt. Drummond was the Force Lead on the computerisation of all Production Records onto an Excel Spreadsheet. The records at that time were held in paper Production Log Books. 

I had a basic working knowledge of Excel, but I had to learn the intricacies of a complex spreadsheet, with help from Matthew, and design a storage system for the actual productions. I took over the internal Production Stores knocking two into one and redesigning the storage racks. For the larger Productions, I was told to convert four of the garages in the back yard into secure storage. Andrew Laing, the driver/handyman helped me when he had freetime.

As time went on I started to bring in the Productions from the outlying Section Stations, Auchtermuchty the Newport-on-Tay. Next was St Andrews, with the help of their Officman, PC Colin Millar, and lastly, Anstruther. Everything was stored at Cupar and logged onto the Productions spreadsheet

Alan McRitchie had been the Criminal Intelligence Collator, keeping all records on a card based system. The next Collator was George Redpath, who took over the position after recovering from a late night severe assault, which occurred in the Tay Bridge Car Park. George was a very good Detective Constable. I was asked to learn the card based Intelligence System to provide cover during periods of annual leave or sickness.

DC Willie Cargill was the Force Collator based at Police Headquarters in Dysart. Willie and Insp. Ian Cowie were the first to set up a computerised Criminal Intelligence System. 

PC Les Farmer, whom I worked with in Newport Section had been off on sick leave for 6 months after a brain aneurism was due to come back to work. George Redpath had just retired and I was covering the Criminal Intelligence office as well as the Productions. I started to train up Andrew Laing to do the Productions. I heard talk that the bosses wanted Les to become the next Collator but they had to advertise the position. Even though I was doing the job I decided not to apply for the position in order that Les would get it. 

About this time, PC Angela McLean came back to work on a staged return after maternity leave and came into the Collator's Office, opposite the Muster Room, to work with me. She was married to DC David McLaren (Hightower). He was 6'10" and she was 5'3". Her father-in-law was D.Supt Rab McLaren, who I knew from my days in Rosyth Dockyard.

The Intelligence Office was moved up to what was the small Hall and Fife Constabulary took on an Analysist, Jim Gray and a Researcher, Margaret Todd.

Jim Gray stayed for about a year then left to become a Housing Investigator with Dundee Council. Jim was followed by Leanne Allan who was Analysist until I retired in 2004.

Supt Alan Maich came to Cupar. I was tasked to start putting together Information Sheets on known criminals. I was able to copy and paste images from their SCRO records onto the Info Sheets. A first in Scotland. Supt Maich took what we had developed to the Scottish Chief Superintendents forum and I was asked to do a Briefing.

PC Scott Finnie came in to work with me as he was under investigation for an incident while he was working at St Andrews. I started working on the Scottish Intelligence Database (SID) and became the Instructor for Eastern Division. I had to go around all the Stations teaching all personnel how to log on, how to make an entry and how to carry out a search.

Of all the Detective Sergeants who were in charge during my time in the Intelligence Office, John Ross Drummond was the only one who truly understood what we were doing. Dave Lyall, Kev Payne and Jim Soutar were amongst the Detective Constables who were constantly in and out of the office.

Les Farmer was off sick for a prolonged period with a collapsed vertebrae. During this time I took over as Divisional Intelligence Officer.


Dougie Milton
Tam Brown

Alan Small

Derek Finnie
Dave Scott
George Kyle



2005 - 2014

In 2011, at 62 years young, Sheilagh convinced me to go to the Doctors for an OAP medical MoT. The results of the blood test showed I was prediabetic.

In January  2012 I was diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes and put on medication and advised to follow the NHS Diet Plan.

Nothing changed until January 2016 when I went out to South Africa to visit with Jose. 

On Sunday 24th January 2016, Jose and I drove up to Robertson to stay with Dr Tad Patycki, a friend of Jose's from Welkom. Over tea, Jose told Tad that I had Diabetes. Tad looked over at me and said: "you're too fat". I replied, " tell me something I don't know". He asked what I drank and I said that I used to like a lager, to which he said, "too much sugar". Wine? I said I liked red wine, to which he replied, "too much sugar". He told me to stick to whisky. Tad showed me a book called 'Real Meal Revolution' by Professor Tim Noakes. Over the next few days, I sped read the book, so enthralled with its message. The logic and theory it contained just made total sense. If you're diabetic you need to eat 'High Fat Low Carb' (HFLC), as its the carbs which add to the visceral fat around your internal organs. 

Tad was very interested in my blood/glucose readings. At that time they were around 9.5mmol/L. He said this was far, far too high and I had to stop eating bread, potatoes, rice, cereals etc straight away.

Every time we went into a Winery to do some wine tasting, Tad always asked the lady behind the counter how much sugar was in each of the wines. Through this, we worked out that Sauvignon Blanc had the lowest sugar content as they didn't add additional sugar in the fermentation process. When I got back to Cape Town I bought a copy of the book and brought it home. 

In the years since I have tried to follow the HFLC way of eating. A way of eating and not a diet!

At my heaviest I was 124kg. This fell to a low of 111kg following my knee replacement (September 2019), then levelled off at 115kg (April 2020).

Tom Crozier
Ross Bennett
Jim Westwood
Natalie Todd
John Cordiner
Donna Malone
Ann Barrett
Sandra Search
Willie King
Debbie But
Susan Mitchell
Annie Butterfield
George Haddow
Mark Christie
Scot Finnie
Tam Barnett
Tam Glen
Derek Glynn
Annie Buist
Sheonagh

Northern:-

Grampian:-
Ian Gray
Keith Forrest
Alaister Graham
Karen Williams

Tayside:-
Stuart Vitesse
Donald Scobie
Derek Raitt
Lesley
Denise
Charmaine

Central:-
Caroline
Trina

L&B:-
Douglas Wright
Rachel Watson
Susan Mitchell

Strathclyde:-
Sheena Brennan
Stewart McClymont
Raymond Murdoch

D&G:-
Stephen Stiff
Kjersti Wittman
Christine Kilpatrick
Dave Kilpatrick


SCDEA:-Williams
Martin Giles
Jamie

Disclosure Scotland:-
Margaret Gray
Tracey
Ann Hamilton
Brian Gorman
David Inglis
Kat Felder

Lindsay Davie




Andrew Rennie

Mitch Rennie


Derek Dempster

Jamie Davies

Nancy Davies


Grant Wishart

Mozo


Frankie Burns


Ryan Milne

Arne Milne

Andrew Simpson


Jock Nelson

Ronnie Nelson

Jake Simpson



Alex Smith

Dot Smith

Brian Forbes

Hamish Lindsay

Millar Bruce



Willie Clark

Derek Finnie

John Mackie


Alan Greenhill

Graham Robertson

Derek Brannan

Sid Jones

Malcolm Campbell

Pat Turner

Heath Nicol


Callum Lawson

Bill Smith

Fred Bremner

Bob Bremner

Jim Smith


Notes


1989 Transferred to Kirkcaldy after buying Reform Street. Had a green coloured Audi. Bought Dave Gibson's Suzuki 250cc with a sidewinder as I didn't have a motorbike licence. Gear-shift shaft broke on the Thornton Bye-pass going down for a back shift. Traffic car stopped to help and passed a message back to Sheilagh to go and get Dave Gibson's trailer and come and get me. Sgt Andy Wood wasn't very happy. I fixed the bike in Willison's Garage then sold it to Graeme Neill, who worked at Kirkcaldy.

May 2013
Trip to Castlebar, Co Mayo to surprise Jose and Arlene on the occasion of their Wedding Anniversary. 

21st August 2015
Stuart McClymont’s last day in the job. Gave him an engraved Quaich.  Went for lunch at lunch and I had Starter - Crostini Funghi (mushrooms and melted mozzarella on Italian bread), Main - Lombo di Maiale (pork chop with oyster mushroom stroganoff and herb-infused rice), Italian beer and black coffee. 8 for dinner. 

From Fiona Harrow

I was a teacher for 30 years. I retired in June of 2015 to care for my dad. After my mom died I took a year off to spend with him as he was broken-hearted. Then, during the year of unpaid leave, my dad became very, very ill. Initially, they thought he had lymphoma but after a biopsy of his lungs, they discovered he had TB. His dad had TB and died of it. The doctors think it was sitting latent in my dad's system all these years and when his immunity lowered ( he has CLL a form of slow-growing leukaemia) the TB became active. The treatment was brutal and lasted 9 months from his diagnosis. I couldn't see how I could possibly teach and take care of him (the night she died in hospital I had promised my mom I would take care of him as she was so worried about him) so I retired in June of 2015. I was actually eligible to retire then, but I was still enjoying working. Now I look after him, it is like a second career. I never married and don't have children.

My eldest brother George is married to Glenna and they have two boys Geoff and Ian. George has had cancer, multiple myeloma, for ten years and has been on long term disability from his work, he was in computers. He just turned 65 and had to take retirement due to the cancellation of his LTD at 65. His oldest Geoff is married with two kids and lives in Vancouver, British Columbia. Ian never married but has been with his partner Chantelle for about twelve years. He lives in Kitchener, about an hour from here. He works for Google, in security programming, I think.

John is the next brother, he is 63 this December. His first wife Mary died of leukaemia in 1993. They had three kids, Stephanie, Michael and Mark. Stephanie lives in Toronto and works in real estate, Michael lives in Barrie, he is a dairy farmer and Mark lives in Brampton, he is a police officer. John remarried and moved to the states where his new wife was from.

Elizabeth has her own business planning and runner no conferences all over the world. She is thinking about retiring, but the jobs keep coming. She just turned 61. She was married early and then divorced. She had a daughter Allison with her first husband. Allison is married with one child and lives on an organic farm in Sudbury which is in northern Ontario. Elizabeth remarried an Englishman named Alan and they had twins, Devon and Nicola. Nicola lives in Ottawa, she is a veterinarian just across the provincial border in Quebec. Devon just recently moved to London, England this January to pursue her dream of working abroad in her chosen career of photo editing. She landed a job interview with Jamie Oliver's media company and just found out on Monday that she got the job. She is very excited.



Here is Ian Linton's email. I googled his name and found him in a newsletter about gardening in the town where we last had a mailing address for him after his mom died. Not sure if he wants to be contacted as his reply was brief and he never did get back to me. He said he would have to ask his sister about his mom's birth and death dates.

ian@ianlinton.demon.co.uk

John Powell does not have an email address. I contacted him through his daughter Judith. John had two sisters, Thelma (Harper) who was the teacher and Eleanor (Brown). Sadly, Eleanor died of bowel cancer about six years ago. She had one daughter Carol (Clark). Carol is married and has two kids.

John Powell is the one who tends the graves. He took care of Grandma Powell's grave for years as she raised helped him when his own mom wasn't well, or so my mom told me. He also takes care of his dad's grave. He, like his dad (Abe), is an avid gardener. My mom always appreciated that John Powell took care of Grandma Powell's grave.

I keep in touch with John Powell's daughter, Elizabeth thought we also hear from Ethel and Sheila from time to time. Elizabeth married Richard who was from Malta. Sheila has Parkinson's and has had a very rough year as had her husband Graham. I contacted Elizabeth to say I had heard from you. She vaguely remembers you and your sister. She said many years ago (the 1970s) she was visiting Ethel who was then living in Tadcaster and Ethel took them to see your mom who was also living there. She talked about you and your sister, but Elizabeth never met them. Elizabeth thought you were a policeman. She thinks her sister Ethel knew your sister.

Elizabeth also said that when she went with her mom (Bessie) to visit your mom's sister Mary in Southend, Elizabeth heard about Ian and Susan Linton, but never met them. The last address she had for them is the same one we have: Ian and Doreen Linton, 51 Washington Road, Maldon CM9 6BN. They sent him a copy of the family tree they started about 20 years ago, but they never heard back from him.

Hope this answers some of your questions. Good luck with the house plans. I think you would get along great with Glyn Harper, Thelma's son. He and his wife have a 900-year-old miller's cottage and also own a recreational property (cottage), I think in Fort William.


Joseph Powell and Anne Chapman were parents to John Thomas Powell our grandfather and Joseph Powell (1867-1925) and Arthur Powell (1869-1962). Nigel's great grandfather was Joseph Powell (1866-1925) and Joseph when Joseph married, his brother of Arthur Powell and Arthur's soon to be wife Ellen Dorcas Partridge, were the witnesses for Joseph's wedding, Nigel has the marriage certificate with all their names on it. He also has birth certificates for Joseph Powell and for Angelina Powell.
Nigel and I have been working together to solve a few mysteries over the past year including the changing ages of Joseph and Mary who were the same age in one census and then suddenly years apart in the next ( I figured out they were twins and found their baptism certificates to prove it) and also finding my mom's Aunt Dorothy who my mom thought was her dad's youngest sister, but who I have since discovered were actually Angelina Powell's daughter with James Baggott, but who was raised by Anne Chapman or at least she was living with them during the 1910 census. 
I will send you an email with my correspondence with Nigel so you can try and follow these trails that have to lead us to where we are today.
Nigel lives in Berkshire now, but was born in West Midlands and still has a lot of families there. I discovered him on an ancestry tree that seemed to match closely to mine and when we dug deeper we discovered we were related!

When you get the time you can take a look at these emails to follow our journey of discovery. I did not save all the ones about looking for Dorothy, but it was a week of back and forth idea swapping and I eventually put the puzzle together.

Fiona

March 8 2016

Me:
I have William Nicholas Powell married to Esther Hartshorn on March 5, 1838. I am also "tentatively" thinking William's father is also a William (1789-1866) and that his mother could be Ann Thurston (1782-1855) and William Powell's father could be John Powell (1740-1819) and married to Elizabeth "Betsy" Taylor (1752-1815). If this is correct, and it might not be, then John Powell's parent might be Thomas Powell (1715 -?) and Ann? (1720-?). I had been stuck at John Thomas Powell all last year, but if this falls into place it would be very exciting for the Powell side of our family. Looking forward to hearing what you have to say/share.

March 9 2016
Nigel:
Hi Fiona
The Powells of West Bromwich has been tricky to sort out. They were illiterate and innumerate this has created some problems. I need to check my records properly and then I'll get back to you. Can you let me have an email address so I can write at greater length if needed? For now, the christening record certainly links your John Thomas to my John but there are complications. I hope there is a link though as I have never been in contact with any Powell relatives from before my grandfather's generation - he was an only (surviving) child and his parents both died before he married.
Regards
Nigel

March 9
Hey there, possible long lost relative! 
I, too, have found the Powells numeracy skills to be lacking. Here is my "theory" about Joseph born 1843. In the 1851 census, he is listed as 7 years old, as is his sister Mary. But in the 1861 census, he was 10 and she was18. My theory is the census taker was given Mary's age and occupation and then they asked for the next child and when given Joseph's age asked, "How old" and the reply would have been "He's a twin.", but the census recorder heard "He's 10". In the 1871 census, Joseph is no longer living at home. What do you think?

From the 1851 census to the 1861 census William and Esther changed ages, but in the 1871 census were back to the corresponding age from the 1851 census. They also seemed to have remembered where they were born. 

Who was your grandfather? Where are you located now? I am in Canada, the first generation. I look forward to hearing what you have to share.

March 10:
Nigel:
Hi again
I like your idea of the twin/ten thing!
I've had a chance now to look through your Powell tree and my records and we clearly are of the same family. At the wedding of my great grandfather Joseph Powell (1866-1925), the witnesses were Arthur Powell and Arthur's soon-to-be wife Ellen Dorcas Partridge. I have birth certificates for both Joseph and Angelina giving identical parents' names so clearly Joseph, Arthur and Angelina are the siblings that we find in the censuses. Then we have some of the siblings being baptised en masse on April 9th 1881 and that includes John Thomas so he is another of the siblings (that I had previously just like John).
So far so good. And we appear to be second cousins once removed! 
The next step back is slightly more of a leap of faith. Joseph and Angelina's birth certificates have the mother's name as Ann Chapman. Unfortunately, as you have seen, there is no marriage record for that name but there is one for Joseph Powell and Ann Chatwin and I have a photocopy of the original certificate which clearly is Chatwin. Somewhat tentatively, I have allowed myself to accept that Chatwin and Chapman are sufficiently similar in a completely illiterate group for Ann Chatwin and Ann Chapman to be the same person. The wedding certificate gives us the father's names of William Powell and Thomas Chatwin(Chapman?). From that, I have got the birth certificate for Joseph which gives the mother's name as "Esther late Williams formerly Hartshorn" so that all fit together (if Chatwin=Chapman) except that I don't have a middle name for William. I have not tried to go any further back yet.
So this is great and I will add your data on John Thomas to my tree.

I am living in Berkshire now, although I was born in the West Midlands and much of my family is still in the area. For my sins, I am a lifelong fan of West Bromwich Albion so the town is in my blood!
I have been to Canada three times - twice to Toronto (a city I like) and once to Banff (with a side trip to Edmonton). How long have you been over there?
Nigel

Fred Powell
I have a copy of his death certificate that lists him as white, single, male born on December 19, 1909, and died of stomach cancer on November 15, 1986, in Durban, South Africa. At the time my mom had contact with a lady friend named Maisie Byrne, who Uncle Fred was very close to and she sent pictures of them together and wrote to my mom about his death. I will send you a scan of that letter and the death certificate. My mom and dad went to South Africa to visit my dad’s brother in 1996 and they went to the residence where Uncle Fred had lived. The people there gave my mom and dad the name and address of the cemetery, but when they went there they were unable to find his site. They had been told that his cremated remains had been put in a crematorium, but the cemetery had very poor records and the people who worked there could not help my mom and Dad to find his box. My mom and Dad were told at that time that many of the boxes in the cemetery were looted and damaged.

I have a copy of Grandpa Powell’s death certificate and it lists Fred Powell as the informant. This is where I got the information to add to the Ancestry website. I will attach a copy of the death certificate to this email.

As for my dad, we have had a rough month. It was very cold in December (-20C) and we had a lot of snow. Right now it is mild and most of the snow is gone. The weather kept my dad inside for an extended period. The Bronchoscopy went ok, but they did not find much except confirmed the damage left by the TB two years ago. Luckily there was no sign of cancer or a fistula which they thought might be the case. The doctor said inside his damaged lung is a lot of inflammation and raw tissue and she thinks that is where the blood is coming from. We go back to the respirologist in February, but I doubt anything will come of that. He has bad days and not so bad days, rarely, if ever, a good day. Last week I had him at the family doctor about a sore on his shoulder that did not heal after the dermatologist sprayed it as she suspected it was a precancer. The sore did not heal and the redness was spreading over his chest. The family doctor said it was cellulitis and gave us a cream, but I was not convinced. Then last week we got a call from a plastic surgeon to remove a growth on my dad’s knuckle. The plastic surgeon ended up having to do a skin graft to repair the knuckle. To keep the skin graft dry and free from moving for a week they put my dad in a cast from his fingertips to elbow. So last week was stressful as his balance was thrown off and he was unable to use his right hand and he needed help with bathing, dressing, eating, you name it. We have no bathroom on the main level of the house so he needed help on the stairs, so I stayed close to home for the week. They took the cast off today and the graft is healing well, but the arm is splinted for another week to let the graft heal. We can take it off during the day to wash it and exercise his fingers which have become stiff inside the cast as he has severe arthritis. While we were at the hospital today I asked the plastic surgeon to look at the shoulder and he took that growth off right away too so I was right, it was not cellulitis. He was pretty sure it was cancer. He sent it for a biopsy. We go back next week to have the stitches removed from the graft donor site and to have another mole removed.
My dad has been a real trooper through it all, though he has had a few very low days, as can be expected.

Too bad about Ian Linton, he never responded to me either. I guess the lack of contact has just been too long.

I have included part of a letter my Uncle Abe wrote to my mom about the family history. He had quite a bit of information to share. I hope you find the letters and the documents useful. I have included many on the ancestry site under the gallery.


